[Western  music]
[Peter] Good morning
from Southwest Colorado.
a part of the country
where things change very fast economically.
So today we got
a great road trip starting here
in the ranching outpost of Cortez
on the edge of the desert
and going into
the high mountains of Telluride.
One of the wealthiest towns in the country
where the median sale price of a home
is currently $4.7 million.
We have Arizona,
New Mexico right down there.
The four corners region.
Also Utah right over the mountains.
And this is Cortez.
The outskirts of Cortez.
Got some of those
old ranching homes out there.
And you can see the scrub brush.
Small junipers.
High desert.
But in just under 100 miles
we're gonna be in
completely different worlds.
How you doing, sir?
Maybe do some advertising
on these flower planters.
-What are you doing?
-Well this is some of the stuff I build.
-Oh nice.
-So these planters.
-Yeah.
You were saying off camera you want me
to tell the Telluride people…
-…that you're selling planters?
-Exactly.
They can find me in Cortez. [laughs]
-Just come here. Okay.
Here's some of the things I do.
Only because I am a musician too.
Oh nice.
-Cool wall guitar. How much are these?
-I'm trying to get 20 bucks a piece.
Oh that's totally fair.
-You lived here all your life?
-Pretty much.
-This is your place?
-Yeah this is my RV.
Well one of the oldest
trailer parks in Cortez.
-You keep it tight though. It looks clean.
-That's all Ute Reservation.
You got Mesa Verde National Park.
It's a gateway
to Rocky Mountains basically.
-How you doing sir?
-Good. You?
Good. Do you know Kelly?
-Yeah.
-Yeah we know each other.
How's it out here these days?
This town was settled way out
in the middle of nothing.
And as you go through it
this has always been a Native…
You have two Native tribes
that are literally fighting
over the property or the land
right below this town.
What I feel and what I've seen,
this town has coexisted.
Everybody worked together for a long time.
Everything. They've tried to
educate everybody on the same level.
They've tried to bring everything down.
But when you get to
the point of where we are today…
Uh-huh.
There's a problem.
I don't know what the problem is.
With the education?
I'm saying with everything, not just
education, society, it's everything.
When we were brought up
we were taught to respect our elders.
We were taught that
there was a moral standard in the world.
A lot of kids at the time when I was a kid,
I'm assuming same as you in your age,
our parents had guns
in the back of our car.
I was taught how to use a gun way young.
And was taught how to use it respectfully.
We had gun racks in our pickups
when we went to high school.
-You can't do that anymore right?
No you can't. And there's a reason
because there's a lot of individuals
when this punk culture and when I say
punk culture I don't mean punk rock.
I mean the pranksters that are
coming up and going, "It's just a prank."
-It's a lack of respect.
That too. That goes along with it.
Causing trouble.
They literally walk into a store
and they belittle somebody
just to see their reaction
and then come back with
"Oh, it's just a prank."
Isn't that from the parenting though?
It could be. It could be.
-Well what happened is
they changed the law
where you couldn't discipline your kid.
When I was growing up,
you did something that was out of line,
your dad would bust your a**.
-[Peter] Yeah. I didn't cross my father.
-And that was discipline.
If somehow we could get
the United States to go back.
And I say this very loosely
'cause I don't want to go into this
bigotry all that other stuff.
-There's a lot of
frustration in the country.
-Exactly. If we can go back to the sixties,
seventies, eighties, and nineties,
when people were more involved
with helping and being in love
and being tight with each other
and understanding
and respecting everybody's
bubble so to speak,
It'd be a lot easier.
But right now everybody's
been taught and perceived
that it's okay to be who you are.
It makes no difference.
Now we have children
that are literally walking down the street
going, "I'm 17 years old."
They don't have it in mind that
they could be charged for something
but they're going,
"I'm 17 years old. I'm still a kid.
There's nothing
you can do about me." from 12 up.
-What about crime here in Cortez?
Is there much?
-I can't answer that.
-It's getting worse.
But around here it's pretty safe, right?
-Well yeah.
-You watch out for each other?
-This is a neighborhood.
You guys all know each other?
You got people like me, if I catch somebody
doing something stupid I'll go at them.
Simple as that.
-The one thing I can say about Coloradoans
[Peter] Yeah…
We're a family-orientated state.
They will hurt, they will fight,
but they're all
literally family-orientated.
But they have their beliefs
they don't want to give up.
And that's Colorado.
We're not trying to change your mind.
We don't want you to go anywhere else.
Come and enjoy
but don't bring your problems here.
Coloradoans like people,
we just don't like their problems.
-That's my look at it.
-Well said.
-[laughter]
-That's great.
Don't bring your problems.
All right guys. Thank you.
I haven't gotten to town yet. Thank you.
There you can see
the San Juans in the distance.
Way out there. Snow-capped peaks.
Some 14,000 footers.
And we're not even in Cortez yet, guys.
Just pulled off
and they were out and about
and wanting to talk.
So we got lucky.
All right, so here's what it looks like
coming into Cortez.
Your basic strip,
auto dealerships, gas stations,
repair places,
classic Western town.
Nice little downtown here in Cortez.
Roughly 8,500 people in this town.
We're up above 6,000 feet.
Just north of 6,000.
Let's check it out. What's going on?
There we go. A mural on the wall.
Captures the desert landscape
outside of town.
The old Spanish Trail circa 1840.
-Morning.
-Hi there. How are you?
-Doing well.
-Good.
This is a nice place.
-This is a great coffee shop.
-Great coffee shop.
-In my opinion it's the best in town.
-Okay.
-How's Cortez?
-Great.
It's a diamond in the rough.
It's a small town that's growing
but slowly enough that it can manage it.
So it's not changing its identity in a way
where you can't recognize it
after a few years.
-Okay.
A lot of homesteading families
still live here.
They're still ranching, still farming.
There are a lot of individual entrepreneurs
who are doing niche like truck gardens
or a craft, or an art, or working remotely.
So it's got a real mix of people.
-I just met a guy making planters.
-Yeah, there's all kinds of guys.
So this is a part of Colorado
that the everyday person
can afford to some degree?
-To some degree.
-There are 25,000 people in the county.
About 8,000 here in Cortez.
So you go to Durango,
it's a whole different environment.
It's a college town.
And Durango is 25,000 people in itself.
-I'm gonna Telluride.
-Yeah, that's a whole different world.
You have these little worlds
but they're very unique.
'Cause Telluride used to be a mining town
but now it's kind of a ski-yuppie…
sorta…
-So totally different vibe up there?
And one of the key
unique things about Cortez is
it has a Ute reservation to the south
and the Navajo reservation
to the west and the south.
And that's all pretty much undeveloped land
so it's not gonna sprawl.
-And you got stuff going on here.
-Oh, there's a lot going on.
Nice people. How you doing?
[woman] Doing great.
-I'm making a video of the area.
-Nice.
Yeah what are you doing here?
Coffee, treats, you have art.
We do. We have a gallery.
This exhibition
typically changes every month.
The next one will be
a birding festival theme.
-Birding festival?
-Yeah.
How's it going? How do you like town?
I like it. It's a lot of fun.
I like teaching about the area.
-Did you grow up here?
I came from the Navajo Nation in Arizona.
You're Dine'?
Yeah. I'm half Navajo and half Irish.
How's it living on the res and off the res?
What is your experience?
-Is it like two different worlds?
-Very different.
I came from a small community
called Naslini.
And grocery stores
are like 30 minutes to an hour away
depending on where you want to go.
My school was 30 minutes away
when I was in high school
and growing up and everything.
It's a different world.
-How you doing, sir?
-How you doing?
You live in Cortez?
No. I live down in Towaoc down there.
Big difference between
Ute and Dine' or not so much?
Oh we have our differences.
I know that there's
pretty much like what people say
is bad blood between us.
But that's like back way back in the day.
-Okay.
Yeah. I believe so.
I would say there is some people
that still hold that prejudice.
But there's a lot of people
like me and him
that just don't care
about that beef and we get along.
-The beef's way in the past, huh?
-Yes.
-And you're Ute right?
-Yeah. I'm Ute and Navajo.
Oh wow. So the battle's within.
Yeah. The cultural stuff is very similar.
-Okay.
-It's almost identical, you know.
And just the languages
are different you know.
Because like they do
the Native American church
through what I've seen is
several different Native American tribes,
they almost spot on,
the same way how they pray.
-They believe in a creator.
-Gotcha.
Give thanks to that as well.
But some of them like my dad,
he incorporates Jesus,
and my mom incorporates Jesus
in their prayers as well, so…
-Interesting.
They kind of just
add as they go you know, so…
-Right on. See ya.
-See ya brother.
-What do you want to show me?
-The hogan.
The hogan. Oh cool.
People still live in this today
in the Southwest.
-Still out on the rez right now?
-Yeah.
I know a lot of people,
even my cousins, that grew up like this.
I have a hogan within my family.
That one's used for ceremonial purposes
because we don't live here.
But typically this is
a house you would live in.
It's encapsulated in red clay.
Sometimes it doesn't have red clay
but it stays in an octagon shape.
And the cool thing is
you always walk clockwise.
Where the sun rises, that's where
you want your door to be showing.
Okay. When you walk in here,
you would never walk that way?
-You only walk this way?
-Yeah clockwise.
'Cause when you let life into your house
you want to keep going where life goes.
-So when you're living in here
at all times you go clockwise?
Keep going around.
Even if you drop something.
Like if I drop that I gotta go
all the way around if I'm not near it.
That's just how it goes.
-That is so cool.
-Yeah.
So people who live in it.
It would have a dirt floor.
It would be flat.
-So it stays cool in the summers?
-Yeah.
And warm during the winters.
You typically wouldn't have
a giant hole like this.
We just have that because we don't have
like a wood burning stove in here.
But it would go all the way up
and you would cover the holes up there
so that no precipitation
or climate gets in.
-Okay.
And when you cook on the wood burning
stove it heats up your house.
So you have family members
still living like this?
They don't have a normal house.
They stay in the hogan.
Yeah. And I even have cousins where
they still don't have water or electricity.
They have to haul water, haul coal.
Are they on social media, phones,
or are they removed from that too?
No. They don't even speak English.
-They speak fluent Navajo.
-No way.
Do you notice a big difference between the
people that have stayed out of technology
versus the ones that are in it?
Yeah.
I mean they're pretty much detached
as you would think.
Like they don't know the political climate.
They don't know anything
that's going on in the real world
besides newspapers
and what people tell them.
And they kind of stay
with the politics on the reservation
because that's
what's gonna affect them the most.
Do you feel like you're sort of
in between two worlds?
Oh definitely.
Since I'm half Navajo and half Irish.
I used to get made fun of for being White
and then I get made fun of
for being Native.
So I'm like constantly never fitting in.
-Neither here nor there.
-No.
But I grew up Navajo.
I grew up on the rez my whole life.
-You identify more with that than Irish?
-Oh definitely.
I don't know much about Irish culture.
For ceremonial purposes,
my siblings, they're preteens.
They go through puberty ceremonies.
So they last a couple of days.
Four days max.
And my little sister should be
having a ceremony, one of those soon.
-I think that rite of passage
or whatever you call it is so important.
-We don't really have that.
-Yeah, no.
It's just celebrating manhood,
celebrating womanhood.
-So cool.
-Mm-hmm.
You've made 50 Native videos
in the last four years.
[woman] Everything from
cowboys and Indians.
You love it out here?
Oh yeah. I've been out here since '89.
-Where are you from?
England.
-I was trying to pinpoint the accent.
-You sort of lost a lot of the English bit.
-Yeah.
England is beautiful
but it's just flat and green.
-Same, same.
Here you drive two hours that way, and two
hours that way, it's a different reality.
-Right yeah.
Yeah, two hours to Arches,
two hours to Monument Valley.
That's why I started doing the films.
Cool, you're still selling them too.
-Yeah
-DVD.
Not as much but…
[news anchor]
…to the UN's top aid coordinator
who briefed
the UN Security Council on Wednesday.
[man] Let's go outside
so you can see from the outside.
Then we'll come in through the door.
-You're another British man?
-Yes.
-I met David.
-Which David?
I don't know he's got a British accent.
-There's another one?
-What's going on in Cortez?
-There's another one here?
-The Redcoats have come.
I'll have to like find my competition.
[woman] We have one
on the air too on Saturday.
Oh and you have your studio in a safe.
This is our story vault.
So anybody from the community
can come and use this.
We kept all the old bank stuff going.
Okay so this is
the local radio station here?
Yeah we're the community radio station.
So we do local news.
We also have all-volunteer DJs
who come in and do two-hour music shows.
-Great.
They're kind of
the masters of their own destiny.
We don't tell them what to play.
It's all powered by them.
-This is where you're running it from?
-Yeah this is our live studio.
-Is this an NPR affiliate?
-Yep.
How's public radio these days?
It has its ups and downs.
We are optimistic though.
This is so cool.
For a town of only 8,500 people
I didn't think you'd have
such a well-organized setup like this.
Yeah and you're here during our fund drive
too so it's like a very fun time.
-Okay you want people to donate?
-Oh yes.
Okay donate to what's the name?
www.KSJD.org Hit the red donate button
and then we'll take it from there.
-You're gonna show me the theater?
-Yeah, but let's go in the other door.
-Okay gotcha.
Okay so another British man in town.
How'd you end up in Cortez?
Well I used to come here
for mountain biking and now I live here.
-That's wild.
-There we go.
-So this is our theater.
-Okay cool.
Nice.
So you're putting on performances here?
Yes we have perhaps
three or four a week at the moment.
And we have everything from
live storytelling, to bands, movies, etc.
Come and see
we have this wonderful projector.
-Mm-hmm.
So we can also stream from this as well.
There's a little nugget of culture
in the desert I guess.
-Totally different world here.
How do you like it?
I love living here.
-You miss the UK or no?
-I go there quite a lot.
-Okay.
-But this is my home.
Why do you love it so much?
It's the opposite of where I'm from.
I love the desert. It's so beautiful.
Whereas I'm from Scotland,
so it's very green and rainy there.
Here it's very red and dry
and I like the contrast.
-So people come in Cortez,
Sunflower Theatre…
-KSJD is the radio station.
You can also get us online.
We have people who listen in Argentina,
the UK, Germany, Switzerland.
You just go to www.KSJD.org
and hit the play button. It's that easy.
-Great.
[Peter] Here we have a cinema, and guys,
we have a ton of ground to cover today.
We're gonna go through these towns
give you a flavor, a sample.
People waving. Nice people here.
But then I have to move on because
we got to get up to Telluride
before sundown.
Show you that.
Cool place, Cortez. Nice people.
I mean I've literally been here
an hour and a half
and I've spent my whole time
talking to locals.
You can see the La Plata Mountains
in the background.
I believe part of the San Juans
which are part of the Rockies.
Got a massive park here in Cortez.
A ton of soccer fields.
This is just a neighborhood
right near downtown.
Well actually in downtown.
These homes right here,
I was looking on Zillow last night.
Roughly around $350,000.
Some a little less some a little more.
But that seemed to be the average
around this neighborhood.
The median income in Cortez
is roughly around $54,000.
Family median income.
Nationally we're around $84,000.
So obviously it's lower here.
But for the country, especially Colorado,
I would think these are
some great housing prices.
I mean
$350,000 isn't cheap but
a lot of neighborhoods
that look like this around the country
I'm seeing double that price easily,
and California looking, well triple.
So some cool homes.
It was designed well here.
You can see a large median.
Some nice old churches.
And it's just got a nice
calm pleasant interesting feel to it.
So as the British guys were saying
and the guys we met first this morning
it's just this weird hybrid zone of
desert going into mountains
not too far away,
Natives, ranching culture.
For a small town
quite an interesting
cool mix going on here.
This video is sponsored by Ground News
If you're watching my content
then you realize
the world is a very complicated place.
You're here to learn with an open mind.
Unfortunately in 2026
all media has a bias.
Every journal has an angle.
One way to parse through this problem
is with an app and website
I've been using called Ground News.
The feature I love the most
about Ground News
is its Blind Spot feature.
The Blind Spot feature
is a dedicated feed that highlights stories
being disproportionately covered
on either side of the political aisle.
For example the headline,
Ontario Family Mourns Canadian Man
Killed in Israeli Attack in Lebanon.
This story is mostly covered by the Left.
Or Iran Denies Charging Toll for
Indian Tankers Transiting Hormuz Strait.
This story is mostly covered by the Right.
Use Ground News
to get all sides of every story.
Be better informed
with access to a vast amount
of worldwide sources in one place.
And see who owns what media.
And follow the trail of
where the money is coming from.
If you like my content
I think you'll like Ground News too.
Go to www.groundnews.com/peter
to check it out.
Subscribe through my link down below
to get 40% off unlimited access.
Now back to the story.
Wow, what a place.
Almost at 9,000 ft.
Rico means rich in Spanish.
And so in 1879
that's when the silver was struck.
And this town grew to
roughly 5,000 people back in the day.
Now…
Rico's quiet.
Looks like everything's closed.
We got a theater cafe.
For sale.
Beautiful building.
Look at these old door handles.
Looks like an old bar in there.
Interesting.
There's not one person here in Rico
at this point in time.
Bike shop. Nice.
And here's the museum.
I don't think it's open. Nope.
And a coffee shop.
Oh that's a cool coffee shop. Okay.
Maybe they just closed down everything
super early here.
The median family income here
is around $105,000.
So above the national average.
And I think that's just because
people are going not far away
over another pass to a thriving economy.
That being Telluride.
Hey buddy.
-What's your dog's name?
-[man] That's Golda.
[Peter] This has gotta be
a cool USPS to work at.
It's pretty chill huh?
[man] Yeah pretty laid back, relaxed.
The people here all super friendly.
-So are most people here working
up in Telluride? Is that the story?
Yeah.
I would say probably
about half the town works in Telluride.
The other half have some way
of working from home.
-You got one of
the only jobs in town it looks like.
Yeah. There's here,
the gas station, the enterprise,
and the town office.
Where you have the town clerk,
and the town manager, and the librarian.
-Okay.
-That's about it.
So it's a lot of this? Just silent road?
-Yeah.
-No cars?
When I first got here
I saw the left turn lane.
I'm like why do they have the left turn
lane at this tiny little town?
But I figured out why. If you're here
for a couple of winters. All right…
They have to plow the snow somewhere.
We have street parking.
They don't want to plow it into the cars.
So they plow it into the center
where that left turn lane is.
You're getting a ton of snow right?
We're almost at 9,000 feet.
-Um 8,800. So yeah.
-Yeah.
Two winters ago…
I live just not too far from here.
And my dogs could just
walk up and over my five foot tall fence.
-Where'd you move from?
-Originally Oklahoma.
Okay. That's a contrast.
My wife wanted to do
a traveling nurse thing.
-Oh cool.
So we moved into an RV
and traveled around for a while.
Got to this area, decided we liked it, and…
-That's awesome.
Ended up taking this job and buying
the house from the previous postmaster.
-Oh nice.
-She was retiring.
Bought her house.
-Change of the guard.
-Yeah.
-What's your name?
-Michael.
-Michael, Peter.
-Thank you.
-Yeah.
You're the only person I've seen in town.
Well there will be people
at the gas station.
There's people playing on the playground
behind the school.
Actually one of the other drawbacks
is we no longer have a school.
So if you have kids you have to take them
to Telluride or Dolores.
-Take care.
-Nice to meet you.
You too. Thank you.
Just listen to this place you guys.
There's tire noise.
Something running over there but that's it.
Little wind.
Mine Shaft Inn.
And arrows going over.
-You live here but you work in Telluride?
-Yeah.
This is not being rented out?
The mountain owns this.
No this is owned by the mountain.
They own one or two properties
down the road.
And then if you work for the mountain
for the season you can get a room here.
-Telluride ski resort.
Huge mountain resort.
And so they're buying up real estate
in the surrounding towns for employees?
-Is that what that is?
-Yeah.
-Well it's good you got a place to live.
-It's not bad.
You gonna come back next season?
We'll see. See if I can get a real job.
All right some more empty storefronts.
It's pretty tough
to make something fly
in these parts I believe.
Beautiful, beautiful old buildings.
Oh you can see the snow from the winter.
How you doing sir?
-Good.
-They still have church service up there?
-No.
Church is done.
I'm making a video
on the whole part of the state.
-Cortez to Telluride.
-Wow.
So I wanted to put Rico in on it.
-Are you from here?
-I live here, yes.
-What's it like living here?
-You gotta want to do it.
-You gotta be committed.
-It's pretty isolated and uh…
This winter wasn't
but the winter's can be fairly harsh.
I love the winters actually.
It's interesting.
I've seen people come and think,
"Oh wow, this is where I want to live."
So they buy a property and everything
and then a year later they're gone.
-The honeymoon wears off.
-Yeah.
That doesn't bother me.
You know I'm retired. I don't have to do…
-Okay you don't have to work
around here in town.
Drive to Telluride to work
or Cortez or wherever.
-You walking up this way?
-Yeah.
-Can I go with you?
-Sure.
-What's your name?
-Larry. What's yours?
Peter. Nice to meet you.
-What are you doing this for?
Okay so I film, my wife edits,
we go all over America.
Every corner nook and cranny
you can think of.
-Teach Americans about America.
-Great.
We got a great country
with a lot of cool people,
and we like to show it.
Good for you.
So that's what we do.
Larry, do you know anything
about these buildings?
-The courthouse?
-That's the courthouse. Okay.
So they struck silver here.
The place boomed to 5,000 people roughly.
That was as large as it was gonna be.
A few years later
the market on silver went south.
The town did too. [chuckles]
We're also home to silver
but a lot of gold and
lead and everything else but
also pyrites.
It turns out the Atomic Energy Commission
was just getting going.
And you need pyrites,
the sulfur from pyrites,
to refine uranium.
It was a real boom in the '50s.
-Post atom bomb?
-Yeah, right.
-Okay. So there was a boom afterwards.
-Yeah.
And then it declined again.
And we're growing a little bit.
We're about 270, 280.
But half of that,
you know, we're standing here,
that's a summer home. That's a summer home.
Windham is a summer home.
That's a summer home.
-Okay.
-Half the population
is really rich Texans
and people from Arizona
who have second homes here.
A lot of Texans?
A lot of Texans.
So what is a home like that
do you think roughly?
Well it was affordable.
The land and everything
you're probably looking about
-$700,000.
-Okay.
-But in Telluride that would be
like four times as much.
-Five, six, seven times as much.
-Oh, wow!
Yeah Telluride's crazy.
It's a privilege to live on dirt roads.
It's cool. I like this.
People who bought this
really poured a lot of money into it.
-It's beautiful.
-And then that's the Engle House.
Charles Engle was one of
the real pioneers of the place.
And then these are new builds up here.
Okay.
Is this a public street
or am I on a driveway?
-You're on a public street.
-Okay.
You don't want to
walk up someone's driveway.
And you know, given Rico,
go pretty much anywhere you want to go.
People cool? Nice neighborhood?
Yeah they don't mind you wandering around.
-So this is your walk Larry?
-Yeah.
Do your dirt road loop?
Going to get the mail is a workout.
[laughs]
This whole… just combed with roads.
Because of the mines.
There's something like
70 mines
within our eyes view.
Oh really? Up in the hills?
None of them are working now.
-No more mining left in town at all?
Not yet.
We're sitting on
one of the world's largest
molybdenum deposits.
About 400 feet down.
Molybdenum? I'm not even familiar with it.
-Well it's a rare mineral.
-Okay.
And it's used a lot
in electronics and things.
The guy who owns a huge chunk
of the valley up here,
has wanted to open
a molybdenum mine.
And so far we've fought him off
from doing that.
But if it became a national thing then
it would probably happen.
-This place is sitting
on a fortune basically?
-Yeah.
Well Larry, this is where we part ways.
Good luck with your project.
Thank you. I appreciate it.
Thanks for the knowledge.
-Take care.
-Take care. See ya.
[water rushing]
-[Peter] You got a sweet place, man.
-Thank you.
-You digging it?
-Yeah I love it.
We've been here since '21.
And we lived over in Telluride since '09.
It's quiet. There's parking.
It's unfortunate that it's turned into
a second home community
and half of the houses
are empty most of the year.
-Gotcha.
-Meanwhile the service community
can't find housing
or can't live over there anymore.
If you want to just jump over
or pull that off.
I'll pull these guys inside.
This is the newest building
on the property.
Previous owners had
an infinite swim spa in it.
Brick house here.
I met a lady that told me she grew up
with 16 siblings,
moms and dads, and extended family,
in that house in the sixties or seventies.
And that was when the mine was active here.
Where were they from?
Uh I think they live south
probably in Cortez now.
Ute Native American, Ute tribe.
Okay, I was there today.
16 people. When there was 5,000 people
that lived in this town
and now there's less than 300.
What's awesome about this town
other than peace quiet nice architecture?
That you and I get to meet
and just talk here.
I think the dirt road
has something to do with that. Seriously.
-It slows things down.
-I hate the dirt road.
-You hate it?
-It's the dust.
No I love it here. We have a good community
that are all working people
that are happy to stop
and talk and hang out.
-It's awesome.
-There's less ego.
You're not flexing what you got here.
No.
It's not Aspen.
Look I got wood all over.
-I got my ladder just hanging out.
-But this place looks so awesome.
-Yeah but this is a sweet town.
-I love it here.
I mean you can't recreate stuff like this.
No this house was built in 1888
and I'm just feeling fortunate
that it's in my care
and I don't want to ruin it.
It's been here a long time.
-Do you have a family?
-I have a wife.
And a dog. This is a foster.
You want a dog?
I'm good right now. He's awesome.
He is awesome.
A lot of young people here?
Yeah a lot of people have gotten displaced
from Telluride as they lost housing
and moved to Norwood,
Ridgeway, Down Valley,
Montrose.
And the ones that could afford to buy
have established businesses
and careers over there or elsewhere
have moved here
and it keeps growing every year.
We have a new family,
young people, move in like us.
Can… the buy-in is still expensive though.
It's expensive but it's doable.
Okay. It's not Cortez prices.
It's not Telluride prices.
It's in between.
This house in Telluride
would be $13, $15 million.
-Come on.
-Yeah. This property this house.
-$15 mil?
-Easy.
And then they lift the house, gut it,
and totally remodel it.
-The whole thing.
-Okay.
Here I don't need to ask
what you spent but…
This, my neighbors two houses,
up I think they spent 600,
and it's a pretty large house
with a big property too.
Okay. How many years ago?
One.
-Is it going up or did it chill out?
-It's kind of chilled out.
There's not as much on the market.
[Peter] You might have
the nicest trailer in America.
You should see the inside.
It's so awesome.
-You want to show me?
-A little time capsule.
I'll check it out.
-If you're cool, I'm making a video.
-That's fine.
1974, '73.
It's long. Yeah that's how they are.
This is the kid's room.
-How many kids do you have?
-Two.
You play electric guitar?
-My husband does.
-This is awesome.
-Isn't this is cool?
This is so cool.
This is what people
really freak out over is the… Alexa pause.
Is the original avocado green appliances.
-This is like from
the mid-century modern days.
Look at your view.
-Yeah.
It's nice.
-You're winning here. I love the sink.
-I know. It's all original.
-And you know the old wood paneling works.
-Yeah.
Sometimes it doesn't but this does.
It does because it's so bright. Look at all
these windows right across from each other.
-This is awesome.
-We put in a nice stove.
-Super efficient I bet.
-So mostly heats.
Heats with this but heat
just doesn't make it all the way down.
-Okay that's where you guys are.
-This way. Yeah.
Here's the bathroom.
Original tub.
-And there you go.
-The master.
-Keeping it simple.
Compact living. Less than a thousand feet.
Less than a thousand feet.
And then you built this roof overhead.
-This was here.
-Okay.
But yeah,
you have to do this in the mountains.
-You happy you moved here?
-Yeah.
-Did you come from Telluride?
That's a story in town huh?
I still have a really strong
Telluride connection so.
I just talked to a guy up here. Great guy.
He moved a few years ago from Telluride.
-Did he?
-Yep.
-Who?
-He sort of looks like me, bald head.
Actually I thought you might be that guy.
-Yeah. He was my doppelganger.
Let's see if the Enterprise is open.
Nope.
It's not.
"Since 1892."
And then we have the liquor store.
What are they doing? Closing down?
Some stuff in the fridge.
Looks like they've closed down.
This town is cool you guys.
This is really a unique
special feel.
All right. Let's get to Telluride.
Final stop.
[Western music]
This is such a beautiful place.
Telluride founded in 1878.
Almost at 9,000 feet.
I think it's like 8,700 something.
And just a nice quaint downtown.
Like they said back in Rico,
everything is extremely expensive here.
Season just ended for the year
last weekend.
There are no ski tourists.
Looks pretty quiet right now.
Let's check out this bar.
[patrons chattering]
[Peter] Sheep pasture out there?
-That was sheep pasture.
-So you guys are locals?
Yes. Total locals.
-Born and raised?
-Born and raised.
-Hey Travis. Nice to see you.
-Good to see you.
How come you're not in some exotic place?
-We have a baby.
-What?!
Congratulations.
-Oh that's awesome.
-Oh my gosh.
-A baby what?
-Boy, Mason.
Oh my gosh. Congratulations.
-Yes. Thank you.
-Enjoy.
We will. Yeah I gotta get home.
Yeah you do.
-[Peter] Not to the bar, to home right?
-Yeah not to the bar.
-Big trouble.
-Gotta slide right by.
[Peter] See you're from here?
-Yes.
-Yeah we both grew up here.
Fourth generation both sides.
-Fourth gen?
-Yep.
On both our mom's side.
-Married? Couple?
-Happily.
30 blissful years.
Okay. Okay, cool.
You were saying in there,
town is sort of dead right now right?
This is off season.
Skiing just closed.
Now it's kind of construction season
until Memorial weekend
when Mountain Film comes in.
And then that starts the festival season.
And it's busy all the way
until October really.
And this is off season
because most of the people
who work for the ski resort or restaurants,
and they are just dead tired.
So they go for two weeks at a minimum.
-They get out of town?
Because the school's shut
for two weeks for spring break.
-Do they plan the school being shut
right after the ski hills shuts?
-Yes absolutely.
-No way.
Because back in the day a long time ago
they had like normal traditional
spring breaks and stuff.
And everybody would leave
after the mountain closed anyway.
So they're like we should change that.
-Okay.
-And then they do two weeks.
And a lot of people
still take three weeks anyways.
-So this is as quiet as it gets basically.
Yes, this is it.
It was mining that kicked this place off
right? Back in the day, just like Rico?
-Yeah the mining was really declining.
And there was a bunch of locals
that were trying to find.
the next industry to come in
and keep the town going.
-Okay.
And there was an investor
out of Aspen in Beverly Hills
that came in and worked with
a bunch of the local miners
to buy out a bunch of the ranches up on
what is now Mountain Village.
So there was actually ranching here also?
Significant amount of ranching.
That's where my family,
the miners were trying to move out.
And my family are sheep herders
and we needed high country pasture.
So in 1926
which is Aldasoro's 100th year,
my grandfather started buying property.
He bought up about 11 homesteads
throughout on Deep Creek Mesa and that's
where we would summer our sheep.
-What was it called? I'm sorry?
The Aldasoro Ranch.
-Okay. Aldasoro Ranch.
So that's a development or something?
Now a portion of our ranch
is still in agriculture
and a portion of it has been developed.
Okay cool.
So yeah it was fortunate for us,
unfortunate for the miners,
but it allowed them to move on.
Which was ideal for them.
This house right here
is where my mother grew up.
-No way.
-This is 123 South Oak
which is now a restaurant.
Uno Dos Tres.
This is where we spent summers.
I was only here in the summertime
whereas Scott was here year round.
-Where would you stay? Upstairs?
-Upstairs. The house is very small.
And actually the windows because of the
Harchitectural Review Committee, HARC,
you have to keep the same windows
and the same shapes.
So those are the same ones
that have always been there.
-So back in those days, rough and tumble,
scrappy type of place right?
Yeah. My grandfather worked at the mine.
He was the assayer.
Whereas his grandfather
was the mill superintendent.
-I found the right people.
You guys are super deep here.
Super deep in sheep sh*t and mining.
She was just talking about
the Aldasoro side.
This is the Anderson side.
So her mother's side is…
That's where she's fourth generation.
Her dad's side, only third.
-Oh you're not a local then.
-No, no. It's like aw…
How many third or fourth gens
are there? Like a handful probably.
There's a good handful.
I'd say mostly some of
his cousins are probably…
Schuler's and then the Ranta's
and Mahoney's and Stephen's.
-They stayed in the area.
-Yeah there's not a ton.
Historic buildings
had to stay intact largely.
-Which is great. You don't have to
mourn the loss of a bunch of history.
[Peter] So big money comes in and says
I want to buy this for what, $5 million.
-Yeah.
-Is that a fair guess?
And says I want to change it up,
and nope they're not going to.
You can have some changes.
Yeah you can do some changes
but integrity of the structure
needs to remain the same.
-So for instance this house right here
is where my great aunt,
my mom's aunt lived, Minnie Ackerman.
She was a postmaster here.
And see how the front
you can see the wood is
a little bit older compared to the back?
That whole thing was in the back
and it was a shed
that they couldn't tear down.
So that people that bought it…
But there was a house up front
that was newer
that that was out of
the Period of Significance.
Which is up to 1913.
And so anything up to 1913
had to stay intact as much as possible.
So the house was torn down
but the shed in the back
which is probably either a carriage shed
or a garage or a coal shed
couldn't be torn down
and that's what they brought up front
and made this into a bedroom.
That one which was remodeled
and added on to,
I think the last time that sold
was like $16 million.
-This is $16 mi?
-Yeah.
So this was where my great-grandmother
lived and then her son…
But it's four lots.
Cherry bought this
when it was a long time ago.
It wasn't quite like this.
It a different kind of beauty.
-So you're saying this is four lots?
This is what we're looking at?
-Yeah because town lots are 25 feet wide.
-Okay.
-117 or 125 deep.
-Yeah.
You're right next to
the gondola and chair eight.
Oh yeah.
If you're a skier
you just walk right there.
-And this used to be Larson's
and there was like a horse pasture
right down here.
-Horse pasture right here?
-Yeah.
And now this is the gondola goes up.
Now you've got Coffee Cowboy.
Okay there you go. Is that good coffee?
-It's the best in town.
-It's great.
What's a cup of Joe
here at the base of the mountain?
-Eight bucks?
-Four bucks.
-Oh that's not bad.
-Yeah.
I'm actually surprised.
That's quite reasonable.
For being here?
Isn't that like Starbucks prices?
-No it's less than Starbucks.
-It's less.
But it's better coffee.
And it comes with fun attitude at times.
-Are these your friends?
-Great friends.
This is a small town.
We're friends with everybody.
-You know everyone.
Well and we all got to pull together.
-Haley plays hockey with us.
I did a whitewater rescue class with Scott.
-[Peter] So is there a good community here?
-Great community.
That's one of the things
that really does keep us here.
Seriously? I would have thought
a lot of people would have…
I met some guys in Rico that left.
-There's some of that right?
There is some attrition.
But I think what you have to keep in mind
is that we were a small community before
and we needed to
count on each other for different times.
And that's why you won't ever hear us
saying anything derogatory about…
-Or at least not too bad.
Well we don't say anything that is negative
about tourism or the development
because it's those phases that you
have to accept if you really love the area.
And we do love it here and what
we've realized is over the last 30 years
being a part of a community
has really charmed our life in that
volunteer fire department,
all the kids organizations,
skate club, soccer club, angel baskets.
-So that's happening here.
-That's happening.
And Scott you were saying
you were the fire chief?
Volunteer fire chief for about five years.
-Now I'm on search and rescue.
And we're a small community.
So we do bluegrass.
We do blues and brews.
We do mountain film. We do film fest.
Kind of whatever we need
and the social part is fantastic.
My dad was the mayor in the early '70s
when the ski area started.
You know at that time there was
a bunch of hippies that moved to town.
And there was kind of a ruckus
between the hippies and the miners.
And really the hippies were more
politically engaged.
So you know there was a bunch of them
that got on town boards.
Which overall it was great things.
But there was some conflicts.
And you know really some of the hippies
were pretty well-educated too.
-Yeah.
-And they left situations that
were a lot more possibly progressive
than we were here.
-And so that's how it is in a lot of
these towns across the country.
When the mining goes out
and if they're beautiful
the artists come in when it gets cheap.
-Right.
-And that's what happened?
This was one of my grandma's houses.
-Oh nice.
This is an example of full remodel.
So that original house,
stayed.
Same with the shed.
And then all this new section was added on.
Are these mostly second homes?
Or are they local homes?
A lot of them these days are second.
But you know, our second homeowners
or part-time homeowners
contribute so much to our community.
-They do.
For all the 501c3s, the arts.
-Property tax bill must be huge here.
It can be significant,
and in addition, what they do is
there are some that are retired.
They come and have a lot of expertise
in really specific areas.
They get on our boards for
the hospital board, the school district.
So I mean the money, yes,
we really appreciate that.
But they start to love the community
enough that they give their time.
We were talking earlier about the divide.
How about now?
Is there an ideological divide
or not so much?
-There is.
It's more kind of socioeconomic.
It's you know the haves, the have-nots.
And you know the full-time working local
or part-time working local I would say.
You know the ski bum
or the ideal of being a ski bum.
But it's really difficult.
But it always has been.
People complain that they've got to have
three jobs to be able to pay rent here.
But that was how it was
in the '70s and '80s too.
When I lived in Tahoe
we all packed into a home.
Yes. How many of you?
There was a lot. Maybe six.
-For a two-bedroom probably.
-It was loud.
That was how we were in college.
-Was this a church before?
-At one time it was.
-And then it was the…
-Oak Street Inn.
And before that it was a rec hall.
Those are avalanche chutes
right behind there right?
-Yeah. Coming off Ballard.
-Stunning. Ballard Mountain.
This is hard to beat.
People talk big about Switzerland.
I lived in Switzerland for a little bit.
-What part?
-I lived in Verbier.
Okay. Nice.
Look. The mountains are extreme there
but it doesn't have the
get on the open road in your pickup truck,
you know, Western feel
up to it you know?
I would say this is
way less flashy than Aspen.
-Yes.
A lot of people go to Aspen
or Vail to be seen.
They come to Telluride to not be seen.
Okay.
Which is a huge difference.
Telluride Fire?
Heck yeah.
How's it going out there?
It's doing well.
What's up Mr. Ben? How you doing?
-Not much. How about you?
-Doing well.
-Got a painting job going on.
-Yeah.
I didn't like the waste management green
so I switched it to bronze.
That's what it sort of looked like.
One of those West End trash cans.
So I was like I went with
a different bronze look.
So where is the maiden voyage
gonna be for the new paint job?
We're gonna go visit Brittany's family
up in northern Michigan.
Oh nice.
-Upper Peninsula?
-Yeah.
And then we're gonna go up into Canada
over and then back down
and then hit I-80 and just gun it.
Perfect, and it'll be about July 4th.
Exactly. Yeah.
-Just in time for the fireworks.
-It's gonna be a lot of miles.
Take care.
So you guys had all the stories
from your relatives growing up?
Yes. That's the part that was very fun.
The wild and wooly days for sure.
When was the last time
there were prostitutes and gunfights
on the main drag there?
Is that 100 years ago, 120 years ago?
-I don't know.
Might have been a couple of years.
Last year? Last winter?
-The prostitutes never went away for sure.
-No.
One of our family stories
is my great grandmother
the house we saw down by the gondola,
she did laundry for the girls
"on the line" they would say.
And as I understand it
she never met any of them.
They would come to her front door
with a basket, they would put it there,
they would leave,
she would wash their laundry,
fold it put it back, get their laundry,
and then she would give her money.
She did that for years.
And then my mom went to school here.
And one of the madams here was Big Billie.
And she said Big Billie would tell my mom
and her friends in high school
"We used to sell this until you high school
girls started giving it away."
[giggles]
Are there any people
like just long-term holdouts?
They never really had any money
but they're real estate rich
because they're living here but…
-Oh there totally is.
-There's some.
-That demographic hanging on.
There's not a lot.
Some from the mining era
and some from the early '70s era.
Some of the hippies
that came in that you know are still…
They got it then and they're holding.
At some point in the latter '80s
my dad… real estate
was really easy to get here in town
and my dad said
"I'm gonna buy some lots in town."
And my mom said don't you dare buy a lot.
I don't want anything in town.
At that time they were 500 bucks a piece.
-The lot?
-Yeah.
My dad said
why did I listen to her that time?
-Look at this street right now.
-It's great. Off-season.
Because it was a mining town
and they had to turn teams and stuff around
because you go gosh dang
that is a great large…
-Oh teams of horses.
-Teams of horses. Yes.
We actually did the first ever
in Telluride ski-joring a month ago now.
-Look at that.
-Right?
All right guys we got super lucky.
Long-time locals,
they're gonna show us a cool part of town
that they have their hands in.
So we scored.
What a beautiful place huh?
And it's not the first time I've been here.
I went to school at Fort Lewis College
in Durango, Colorado.
It's about two hours from here
for two years in the late '90s.
And I'd come here all the time
because I had one friend who gave me
a ski pass 'cause he never came.
Another friend his father had
one of these monster homes
up near the mountain.
And he said come any time.
I figured out one winter
where I was leaving Durango,
Thursday night snowboarding Telluride
Friday, Saturday, Sunday, Monday,
coming back, Monday night,
gonna school Tuesday,
Thursday, and then off again.
I spent a whole winter doing that.
So a lot of good memories
ripping the terrain up there in the woods.
We're only seeing the lower mountain.
I don't think we're gonna
be able to get up there today
but it goes back a ways.
Really good vertical drop here
over 3,000 feet.
My favorite ski resort in Colorado.
So it feels awesome to be back.
-This is so awesome up here.
It's so amazing.
-This was your family's property up here?
-Yes.
My grandfather
started buying the property.
We ended up with 5,000 acres
on deep Creek Mesa.
This homestead is called the Hogg Ranch.
H-O-G-G.
However it was a dairy farm
which were back in the mining days,
several of the ranches
like the Schmidt Ranch over on Wilson Mesa,
the Hogg Ranch here,
they had the pasture and grew the hay
for the horses that worked in the mine.
When the mine left then these people
had no economic drivers here
so they were ready to get out.
So we bought from…
My family never homesteaded anything
but we bought from 11 other homesteads
of people that left between 1926 and 1950.
-Oh, wow. This is…
-The reason my family did this was because
we were very typical agricultural people.
Had real estate values that went up
so we could get more bank loans
but our source of repayment
stayed the same.
So many of us got into
a jeopardizing situation
with too much cash going out
and not enough cash coming in
and we were seriously gonna lose the ranch.
We were in foreclosure in 1989
everything for $1.4 million.
So 5,000 acres.
-Whoa, whoa. This 5,000 acres in '89?
In '89 was in foreclosure for $1.4 million.
We were the ones,
the airport was on our property.
We had a land lease with them
for $50,000 a year.
And my dad which at that time
thought he'd hit like a home run
that we were good for a long time.
So anyway what happened was
we were finally at a point
where we had to do something.
I happened to be working
in the mountain village
before the mountain village was a town.
And for that development,
Mountain Village Inc.
And I said, daddy we have to develop.
And he said nope my dad bought property.
I can't get rid of it.
That's that's kind of the last resort.
Well we were finally in 1989
at a last resort and we had to subdivide.
Luckily two men came to our rescue.
Dick Depochter and John Horne.
Both were very familiar
with development and Dick…
They did this development right down here.
Meadows at Deep Creek.
My dad said I don't know
how to develop but I'm gonna have to.
So in an effort to lessen the sting,
one of the things
that we did was daddy had…
Daddy was the ultimate developer
and he had a say so.
And everything that happened
or didn't happen.
So the part that is cool
is it's got the Basque heritage
which is his side of the family.
All the road names are relatives
that are still that are here
and some that are still in back in Spain.
-We've been to the Basque country.
-Okay.
So that that lessened the hurt.
I can remember daddy laughing.
I always looked at a sheep pasture
and I didn't know it was this pretty
until everyone started saying how beautiful
it was and I looked up and it is pretty.
[Peter chuckles] Yeah.
Oh wow. This is fantastic.
So beautiful out here.
-A cool spot to check out the whole region.
Because from here you can look
in the town right downtown.
You see the whole valley floor.
That was actually condemned by the town
of Telluride about 20 years ago.
So everything on the south side of
the highway going into town is open space.
What an airport. Check this out.
Plane comes in.
Lands right on this Mesa here.
-That's the highest commercial runway
in the United States.
-What, around 9,000?
It's right at about 9,100.
-Looks like it just drops off.
-It totally drops off.
So it's totally like
flying off an aircraft carrier.
-Denver Phoenix right?
Those are the two commercial.
Denver Phoenix commercial.
They're still working on some other ones
but that's it for right now.
Bunch of private.
Some of the people living in these homes.
-They're flying private.
-All over the region.
So you said Oprah's house
is over there somewhere.
A new house over in the village.
Just finished it.
This is called the Breckenridge Place.
-See how there's two buildings out here?
Back in the day the main house
was there and probably one bedroom.
-Can we can we jump out there?
-Yeah.
And then as the children would get married
they would build their bedroom.
-Oh no way.
-Yeah.
So this was the main home.
And this you will see in Butch Cassidy
and the Sundance Kid, the early days.
You'll see this.
Okay. And that's smart.
You have kids and just put them in little
shacks and get them out of the house.
Well and they were older.
They were actually probably
getting married just guessing.
But what it did is
you figure back in the day
all hands on deck
for any agricultural activity.
-Yeah.
Now it costs you money,
before it made you money.
-Yes.
-Big time.
From the main ranch my sisters and I
would spend virtually all summer
dragging stuff over here to play house
and then spend the last part of summer
dragging stuff
because it's about two miles away
where the old part of the ranch is.
I have very fond memories.
We were so excited when
Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kids came
because they were the ones that popped up
the porch because it had caved in.
So that made it really nice housing.
-Is that a home I'm looking at?
-Yeah. Just got finished.
$1.4 million. All of this land.
Now if you were to value it now
We're in the hundreds…
Probably. Yeah.
Single family lots up here right now are
around $2.5 million.
There's a couple
a little bit lower like 1.6
but like that house sold
for 7.6 a couple years ago.
That one just sold for
$8 million last year.
-Well that's a view.
-Thanks for bringing me up here.
-Sure.
'Cause I didn't think there are
too many fourth generation locals
just walking around town.
But you guys are both realtors?
He's a real estate realtor.
-You're a realtor?
-Yep.
-I work for our family.
I do property management.
-Okay. Scott what's your link?
Wait. My link?
Oh sorry. Your website, your link,
your social media, whatever you're using.
-You're talking to a middle-aged guy.
-Dude you got to ask my daughter.
She runs it.
www.Telluride-home.com or
www.telluriderealestatebrokers.com.
Is this nicer than Mountain Village
as far as values
or it's just as expensive over there?
-It's as, or more over there.
One of the big things
that people are attracted to over there
is being able to ski in, ski out.
And so ski in, ski out,
or ski accessible properties
are another tier higher.
-Okay.
-Yeah.
Pretty cool.
-What are the top going rates here?
$50 million?
There was a house in Mountain Village
that sold in the last year for 39 million.
There's a ranch up here
that was 300 and some odd acres.
It sold for 39.
-Is anyone up here full time?
There's a lot of full time.
Okay. They move in here
from all over the country or?
All over. Yeah.
[Peter] Thank you so much.
Thank you.
I look forward to seeing your thing.
The YouTuber.
Nice to meet you.
Safe travels. Stay in touch.
You'll be cool with your kids
'cause you're on YouTube.
I can hardly wait to be cool
'cause I drive them nuts. "Mom!"
I usually just go to YouTube mechanic.
-You're gonna be viral.
-I hope so.
-I go to learn how to fix things.
-YouTube's amazing.
Here we are in the mountain village.
You can see the ski run
come right through the neighborhood.
Ton of roads up here
with big homes, beautiful vistas.
What a cool adventure today you guys.
Such a cool part of the country,
cool part of the state.
And like I always say
you can never label a place easily.
Take Cortez this morning,
ranching, mixed up town.
Then we had the Ute Reservation
totally different.
Then Rico, mining past.
Spillover from Telluride.
People looking for cheaper real estate.
And then finally Telluride.
World-class resort destination.
Once a mining town.
Totally switched into
a ski resort destination place.
Such a cool part of the country.
And lastly, I'd like to say
everyone we talked to today
is loving where they're living.
I thought that was cool.
Different culture, different temperatures.
Totally different flora and fauna.
Everyone we spoke with we got really lucky.
Met a lot of great people.
Such a cool country.
Such a cool state.
And Southwestern Colorado
is one of my favorites.
All right you guys.
Thanks for coming along on that journey.
Until the next one.
[Western music]